PROOF OF WORK vs PROOF OF STAKE

In a blockchain, transactions are stored in blocks.

After every few seconds/minutes, a new block is generated to store the next group of transactions, and so on.

Each block of transactions needs to be validated before it can be appended on the blockchain.

And there should be a reward system for the validator so that people are willing to do so.

Because of the reward, there are multiple validators competing/cooperating to do so.

Hence, a consensus mechanism is required.

There are two popular consensus mechanisms :

1) Proof of Work (PoW)
2) Proof of Stake (PoS)

In Proof of Work, there are multiple validators (called 'miners') who compete for validating the next block.

In order to determine who gets to validate the next block, they have to solve a complex puzzle (related to the block's data) that requires large computing power.

Whoever solves it first, gets to validate the block and keep the block reward and fee in the form of cryptocurrency. This process is called mining.

eg: Bitcoin, Ethereum (currently), Litecoin use PoW.

The downside is that the entire process consumes a lot of electricity due to the computing power required by the miners to solve the puzzle.

As per some estimates, 1 Bitcoin transaction consumes the energy equivalent of approx 53 days of power for the average US household. Ofcourse this can vary due to certain factors, but it's huge.

Proof of Stake, on the other hand, doesn't require mining or solving a puzzle.

For a PoS chain, multiple validators 'stake' certain amount of cryptocurrency i.e. lock some cryptocurrency on chain.

For validating a block, the system chooses someone from the people who've staked certain amount of cryptocurrency.

The more cryptocurrency you've staked, the better your chances of being chosen.

If chosen, you get to validate the block and keep the transaction fee for the block's transactions.

Since, there's no competition for solving a complex puzzle, the huge computing power isn't required. Hence, PoS is much less energy-intensive as compared to PoW.

eg: Ethereum 2.0, Solana, Cardano use PoS.

This makes PoS relatively greener and cheaper as compared to PoW.